---
layout: post
title: "A Multifamily Loan Underwritten in 2021 Now under Stress"
date: 2024-10-28 11:00:00 -0500
categories: CMBS
---

# Multifamily property from the 2021 cohort under stress

Multifamily Dive reported on Oct. 23 that the "The Brush Factory Lofts, which sits in a neighborhood where rents are falling, saw its loan hit 90 days’ delinquent in August."

[Historic Philadelphia building goes into servicing](https://www.multifamilydive.com/news/brush-factory-lofts-south-philadelphia-housing-special-servicing/730466/)

The loan happens to be in a CMBS deal that produces a lot of information from disclosure. In this post we take a closer look to review the loan and showcase how analysts can perform review based on publicly available data.

First, we use SEC EDGAR to search "Brush Factory".

https://www.sec.gov/edgar/search/#/q=%2522Brush%2520Factory%2522

Because of the uniqueness of the term, we quickly identify the deal that was issued by DEUTSCHE MORTGAGE & ASSET RECEIVING CORP and Benchmark 2021-B30 Mortgage Trust in November 2021. The $795 million deal is issued by Benchmark 2021-B30 Mortgage Trust, also known in the industry as BMARK 2021-B30.

From the prospectus, we can tell the Brush Factory Lofts loan is the ninth largest loan in the poal, with $33 million balance, 68% LTV, 1.3x DSCR and 7.4% debt yield. Annex A-3 provided a DESCRIPTION OF the MORTGAGE LOAN. The property had undergone and completed the second phase of the multifamily conversion, which was well documented by local press. Because it was new, the financials presented only include one year of data. And unfortunately that was between 2020 and 2021 during the height of the pandemic. The 12 month NOI leading to August 2021 was $1,764,141. The underwritten NOI was $2.4 million, almost doubled the actual NOI at the time.

A footnote claimed that "The increase from Most Recent NOI to Underwritten NOI can be attributed to recent leasing" without going into much of the detail.

Note that the property claimed the the Occupancy rate as of September 2021 was 97.4%. Without much room to improve occupancy, that path to doubling NOI hinged mostly on increasing the rents significantly.

The ten-year interest only loan has a rate of 3.5%. UW-implied caprate is about 5%, in line with industry practice. But if we use the as-is NOI, the cap rate would be close to 3.75%, rendering the project close to not profitable.

When it comes to the borrower profile, the prospectus pointed out that "the Rufo Organization has acquired a large portfolio of value-add residential properties." This property sure looks like another value-add project, which is interesting because usually the loans go into these conduit deals are stablized, income producing. But looking back on the heydays of CMBS deals in an era of cheap money, it's understandable that the loan sneaked into the deal with rosy outlooks.

A multifamily unit mix and market analysis shows that there's not much of a gap between the property's rent and Average Market Rent. So again, to achieve the UW NOI, it's less about filling up the units or catching up on the market rent, but rather hoping the entire Philadelphia market rent increase significantly in the following years.

(In the next post, we will analyze the market rent increase from 2019 - 2024)

The procpetus also disclosed other risk factors associated with the Brush Factory Lofts Mortgage Loan throughout the document.

- There is pending litigation involving a mechanic’s lien recorded against the Mortgaged Property in the amount of $204,658 which was filed in connection with work performed by a subcontractor.
- Within the last 10 years the borrower sponsor and nonrecourse carve-out guarantor, Anthony M. Rufo, has been the subject of **three** foreclosures related to residential development projects. Mr. Rufo was also the subject of an IRS claim of approximately $1.33 million, which claim resulted in a payment plan of which less than $90,000 in payments remained as of October 1, 2021.
- Mortgaged Property has no or limited prior operating history or the related Mortgage Loan Seller did not take the operating history into account in the underwriting of the related Mortgage Loan.

In order to track the loan performance, we turn to Benchmark 2021-B30 Mortgage Trust monthly loan performance data. After about one year into existance, in January 2023, the trust reported the loan had made late payment (Less Than 30 days). The loan would continue to pay late and disclose the whole 2022 NOI came to be $2,3 million. By the second half of 2023, the property reported most recent NOI to be $2.4 million, which equals the UW NOI. Despite that, the loan continued to pay late.

In December 2023, for the first time, the loan showed 30 day past due. The last payment was received on 10/06/23. The loan got off the delinquency table in early 2024, paying late, and then re-entered delinquncy in Jun 2024. By August, it had entered 60 DPD bucket, and by September, 90 DPD. This is when it hit the newswire and the loan was transfered to special servicer (08/09/24).

As for why the loan became delinquent despite having seemingly healthy DSCR, the news article cited that"The southwestern Philadelphia submarket, where the Brush Factory Lofts sits, faces challenges. It is the only neighborhood in Philadelphia where landlords are cutting rents." But the trouble signal from the loan is apparent from the early days of the deal. The loan spent most time paying late, a strong signal to show something was going on behind the scenes.

By closely monitoring the monthly perfomance data, analyst should have the loan on their watchlist, especially given the size, way before it hit the news or the special servicer. If you are interested in discussing it in more details, please contact info@frescoanalytics.com